Project Design Writeup and Approval Template
Annmarie Stockinger


Project Problem and Hypothesis:
Can you predict whether or not a deal is going to close based on the past performance of deals that are similar? While the answer to whether or not a deal is a binary decision, the impact goes beyond a simple yes or no. If we are able to estimate whether a deal is going to close or not we can better gear marketing, sales and efforts to those deals that are most likely to be worthwhile. Overall, there are many ways to attempt to predict this outcome-- due in part to the complex nature of the sales process. However, I think the factors most likely to be impactful are going to be deal size and company size. A big component of this project will be feature selection and deciding what fields have the largest impact. 

Datasets: 
Any salesforce or CRM data will work for the project, in order to complete the project I will be using data from the KDD Cup 2009, there is both a large and small data set as well as training and test data. The data is divided into three parts churn, appetency and up-selling. To complete the project I will be using the small data set which includes 230 variables with the first 190 variables being numerical and the last 40 variables being categorical. The data is in a text export format from relational databases and can be imported into Python notebook for analysis. While a larger data set of 15000 examples exists, I feel the smaller data will be easier to analyze in the class setting. 

Domain knowledge: 
As a math major and former technology sales associate I have spent a lot of time collecting leads, making cold calls and attempting to quantify business to consumer relationships. I think this is helpful knowledge because it gives me a large amount of insight into how these relationships are normally formed, managed and terminated. There are some companies that currently try to give the business a head start in terms of customer churn, appetency and up-selling like Lattice or Tibco's Spotfire. These tools do high level analytics work but they are also very expensive meaning that many of the companies that could most benefit from the use of these tools like startups with limited funds for their sales team and extra sales tools. There are a lot of struggles in trying to quantify this research-- as sales is general a social art and many people who work in sales-- even at the executive level, are more interested in the social cultivations of business to consumer relationships than the scientific calculation of a customer's interest. Some other software deals with this more qualitative approach better. Crystal Knows is a great example because instead of focusing on the metrics behind sales it gives consultants a way to use NLP to understand email correspondence and better gear their communications to the listening and buying personas of their customers. Many CRM's also already do analytics, however; these are often hidden inside the reporting functionality of the system and are heavily dependent on the person accessing the document and their ability to analyze and understand the metrics. For the purpose of this project I intend to hold myself to the accuracy values displayed in other responses to the KDD cup challenge which can be found on the kdd cup website. While the winning team from IBM had accuracy scores in the upper 70's and above in every category I would like to shoot for an accuracy level within 10 percent of that. 

Project Concerns:
My main questions and concerns come with the lack of a good dataset for analysis. The data I will be using is B@C sales data instead of the B2B data that I am more comfortable with. I am unsure as to whether or not a model built based on this data would have further applications that align with my interests. Furthermore, I am concerned that sales is not the ideal area for a purely quantitative analysis of data. Luckily I feel the data I do have is very high quality since it is clean, well documented and has been used in a large scale national competition. Also, there are many papers that exist on this data and its strengths and weaknesses as a training and test set. The risk of my model being wrong is a decrease in the propensity of customers to switch provider (churn), buy new products or services (appetency), or buy upgrades or add-ons proposed to them to make the sale more profitable (up-selling). The strength of my model being correct is the ability to harness those predictions to increase the rates at which churn, appetency and up-selling happen. This knowledge could also result in the creation of an application for CRM data that would allow companies to make these predictions in real time and increase the productivity and direction of their sales and marketing teams. The key to this project will be utilizing the research and data that already exists to set realistic benchmarks for success, accuracy and scale that will allow me to make a confident decision at the end of the project as to if the model would likely have a negative or positive effect if implemented in application based system for a company. This data is very specific and is B2C data so these limitations will have to be considered-- however, the data is fairly accurate and well documented lowering the risks associated with poor data quality and collections.

Outcomes:
I expect the output to be a model that can predict the three factors of churn, appetency and up-selling with an accuracy equal to or greater than 70 percent overall and an average of 70 percent per category predicted. I believe this level of accuracy would be too low as a stand alone project for the industry, however, this accuracy level would provide a high enough value to consider further research and development into predictive sales modeling. I am most curious about the ability to predict churn because I believe this has some of the most real world applications. Most CRM's are able to capture LinkedIn data that can tell you a lot about a company and its previous business partners-- if we are able to accurately predict the probability that a company will change service providers that would gives sales consultants a large upper hand the insight needed to spend their time efficiently. I believe the model only needs to be as complicated as necessary to provide a comfortable level of accuracy. I estimate that the project will require both clustering and classification-- however, I find it unnecessary to overly complicate the model if not needed to complete the task. I think in order to be successful I would want to have my desired level of accuracy and see if it is reproducible with another dataset (maybe B2B data if I can acquire some). If the project is a bust, the knowledge will still prove valuable and will just further shape my direction in designing a predictive sales analytics model. 
